---
layout: post
title: Job Hunting - part 3 (final)
date: 2007-03-27 15:17
author: Jon Badgett

categories: [General IT, Job Hunting]
---
My job hunt has finally come to a close.  Before spring break, I secured 3 interviews.  I went to the first - and enjoyed it so much that I decided that's what I wanted to do.  The second interview the next day stretched on for four and a half hours!  I left there knowing that I never wanted to work there.  Something about writing in a custom version of COBOL (with added GUIs...weird) 40 hours per week in a solitary office with no windows did <span style="font-style: italic;">not</span> thrill me.  <br /><br />The good interview was last Tuesday.  This morning they called and offered me the job!  I won't disclose major details here - but the wage is <span style="font-style: italic;">very</span> good.  The benefits are great.  They're even going to help pay for my relocation!  How's that for nice?  All that and the company is located in the Woodlands, TX.  It has to be the most beautiful place in all of Houston.  I am really happy.<br /><br />This job search has been a learning experience.  What do I really want to do?  What makes a job worthwhile?  What am I absolutely unwilling to do?  These are all good questions.  My Dad always tells me that if you're doing a job that you enjoy, it doesn't matter how much you get paid.  I've held fast to that belief and I think it's done me well.  Here are some quick thoughts about the job hunt:<br /><ul><li>Never settle for something you could see yourself hating.</li><li>If the drive to the interview and back feel like traveling cross country, don't work there.</li><li>Networking (connections) are the best way to get your resume in front of the people who make decisions.  I only got one serious inquiry in all of my applications through job board sites.</li><li>Avoid negative words during interviews.  Even if the interview goes fantastic...those words will haunt you until you hear whether the company wants you or not.  Be honest - but positive.</li><li>Aptitude tests, canned interview processes (heavy recruiting), and non-knowledgeable points of contact to a company make for an extremely non-appetizing job outlook.  Interviews go both ways.</li><li>Smile and laugh when you can at an interview.  Ask questions.  The good companies don't need any more yes-men than they already have.</li></ul>My sincere hope is that this is the last you'll see about Job Hunting on this blog. :)
